TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF USE
Version: Axolotl Edition
Last Updated: When Paris Was Spreading Its Peacock Tail

BY SCROLLING DOWN AND CLICKING AGREE YOU CONFIRM THAT YOU
HAVE READ AND UNDERSTOOD THE FOLLOWING IN ITS ENTIRETY.

---

There was a time when I thought a great deal about the
axolotls. I went to see them in the aquarium at the
Jardin des Plantes and stayed for hours watching them,
observing their immobility, their faint movements.
Now I am an axolotl.

I got to them by chance one spring morning when Paris
was spreading its peacock tail after a wintry Lent.
I was heading down the boulevard Port-Royal, then I
took Saint-Marcel and L'Hopital and saw green among
all that grey and remembered the lions. I was friend
of the lions and panthers, but had never gone into
the dark, humid building that was the aquarium.
I left my bike against the gratings and went to look
at the tulips. The lions were sad and ugly and my
panther was asleep. I decided on the aquarium, looked
obliquely at banal fish until, unexpectedly, I hit it
off with the axolotls. I stayed watching them for an
hour and left, unable to think of anything else.

In the library at Sainte-Genevieve, I consulted a
dictionary and learned that axolotls are the larval
stage (provided with gills) of a species of salamander
of the genus Ambystoma. That they were Mexican I knew
already by looking at them and their little pink Aztec
faces and the placard at the top of the tank. I read
that specimens of them had been found in Africa capable
of living on dry land during the periods of drought,
and continuing their life under water when the rainy
season came. I found their Spanish name, ajolote, and
the mention that they were edible, and that their oil
was used (no longer used, it said) like cod-liver oil.

I didn't care to look up any of the specialized works,
but the next day I went back to the Jardin des Plantes.
I began to go every morning, morning and afternoon
some days. The aquarium guard smiled perplexedly
taking my ticket. I would lean up against the iron bar
in front of the tanks and set to watching them.
There's nothing strange in this, because after the
first minute I knew that we were linked, that something
infinitely lost and distant kept pulling us together.
It had been enough to detain me that first morning in
front of the sheet of glass where some bubbles rose
through the water. The axolotls huddled on the
wretched narrow floor of moss and stone in the tank.
There were nine specimens, and the majority pressed
their heads against the glass, looking with their eyes
of gold at whoever came near them. Disconcerted,
almost ashamed, I felt it a lewdness to be peering at
these silent and immobile figures heaped at the bottom
of the tank. Mentally I isolated one, situated on the
right and somewhat apart from the others, to study it
better. I saw a rosy little body, translucent
(I thought of those Chinese figurines of milky glass),
looking like a small lizard about six inches long,
ending in a fish's tail of extraordinary delicacy,
the most sensitive part of our body. Along the back
ran a transparent fin which joined with the tail, but
what obsessed me was the feet, of the slenderest
nicety, ending in tiny fingers with minutely human
nails. And then I discovered its eyes, its face.
Inexpressive features, with no other trait save the
eyes, two orifices, like brooches, wholly of
transparent gold, lacking any life but looking,
letting themselves be penetrated by my look, which
seemed to travel past the golden level and lose itself
in a diaphanous interior mystery. A very slender black
halo ringed the eye and etched it onto the pink flesh,
onto the rosy stone of the head, vaguely triangular,
but with curved and triangular sides which gave it a
total likeness to a statuette corroded by time.
The mouth was masked by the triangular plane of the
face, its considerable size would be guessed only in
profile; in front a delicate crevice barely slit the
lifeless stone. On both sides of the head where the
ears should have been, there grew three tiny sprigs,
red as coral, a vegetal outgrowth, the gills, I
suppose. And they were the only thing quick about it;
every ten or fifteen seconds the sprigs pricked up
stiffly and again subsided. Once in a while a foot
would barely move, I saw the diminutive toes poise
mildly on the moss. It's that we don't enjoy moving
a lot, and the tank is so cramped — we barely move
in any direction and we're hitting one of the others
with our tail or our head — difficulties arise,
fights, tiredness. The time feels like it's less if
we stay quietly.

It was their quietness that made me lean toward them
fascinated the first time I saw the axolotls.
Obscurely I seemed to understand their secret will,
to abolish space and time with an indifferent
immobility. I knew better later; the gill contraction,
the tentative reckoning of the delicate feet on the
stones, the abrupt swimming (some of them swim with
a simple undulation of the body) proved to me that
they were capable of escaping that mineral lethargy
in which they spent whole hours. Above all else,
their eyes obsessed me. In the standing tanks on
either side of them, different fishes showed me the
simple stupidity of their handsome eyes so similar to
our own. The eyes of the axolotls spoke to me of the
presence of a different life, of another way of seeing.
Glueing my face to the glass (the guard would cough
fussily once in a while), I tried to see better those
diminutive golden points, that entrance to the
infinitely slow and remote world of these rosy
creatures. It was useless to tap with one finger on
the glass directly in front of their faces; they never
gave the least reaction. The golden eyes continued
burning with their soft, terrible light; they continued
looking at me from an unfathomable depth which made
me dizzy.

And nevertheless they were close. I knew it before
this, before being an axolotl. I learned it the day
I came near them for the first time. The
anthropomorphic features of a monkey reveal the
reverse of what most people believe, the distance
that is traveled from them to us. The absolute lack
of similarity between axolotls and human beings
proved to me that my recognition was valid, that I
was not propping myself up with easy analogies.
Only the little hands... But an eft, the common newt,
has such hands also, and we are not at all alike.
I think it was the axolotls' heads, that triangular
pink shape with the tiny eyes of gold. That looked
and knew. That laid the claim. They were not animals.

It would seem easy, almost obvious, to fall into
mythology. I began seeing in the axolotls a
metamorphosis which did not succeed in revoking a
mysterious humanity. I imagined them aware, slaves
of their bodies, condemned infinitely to the silence
of the abyss, to a hopeless meditation. Their blind
gaze, the diminutive gold disc without expression
and nonetheless terribly shining, went through me
like a message: "Save us, save us." I caught myself
mumbling words of advice, conveying childish hopes.
They continued to look at me, immobile; from time
to time the rosy branches of the gills stiffened.
In that instant I felt a muted pain; perhaps they
were seeing me, attracting my strength to penetrate
into the impenetrable thing of their lives. They
were not human beings, but I had found in no animal
such a profound relation with myself. The axolotls
were like witnesses of something, and at times like
horrible judges. I felt ignoble in front of them;
there was such a terrifying purity in those
transparent eyes. They were larvas, but larva means
disguise and also phantom. Behind those Aztec faces,
without expression but of an implacable cruelty,
what semblance was awaiting its hour?

I was afraid of them. I think that had it not been
for feeling the proximity of other visitors and the
guard, I would not have been bold enough to remain
alone with them. "You eat them alive with your eyes,
hey," the guard said, laughing; he likely thought I
was a little cracked. What he didn't notice was that
it was they devouring me slowly with their eyes, in
a cannibalism of gold. At any distance from the
aquarium, I had only to think of them, it was as
though I were being affected from a distance. It
got to the point that I was going every day, and at
night I thought of them immobile in the darkness,
slowly putting a hand out which immediately
encountered another. Perhaps their eyes could see
in the dead of night, and for them the day continued
indefinitely. The eyes of axolotls have no lids.

I know now that there was nothing strange, that that
had to occur. Leaning over in front of the tank each
morning, the recognition was greater. They were
suffering, every fiber of my body reached toward
that stifled pain, that stiff torment at the bottom
of the tank. They were lying in wait for something,
a remote dominion destroyed, an age of liberty when
the world had been that of the axolotls. Not possible
that such a terrible expression which was attaining
the overthrow of that forced blankness on their stone
faces should carry any message other than one of
pain, proof of that eternal sentence, of that liquid
hell they were undergoing. Hopelessly, I wanted to
prove to myself that my own sensibility was projecting
a nonexistent consciousness upon the axolotls.
They and I knew. So there was nothing strange in
what happened. My face was pressed against the glass
of the aquarium, my eyes were attempting once more
to penetrate the mystery of those eyes of gold
without iris, without pupil. I saw from very close
up the face of an axolotl immobile next to the glass.
No transition and no surprise, I saw my face against
the glass, I saw it on the outside of the tank,
I saw it on the other side of the glass. Then my
face drew back and I understood.

Only one thing was strange: to go on thinking as
usual, to know. To realize that was, for the first
moment, like the horror of a man buried alive
awaking to his fate. Outside, my face came close to
the glass again, I saw my mouth, the lips compressed
with the effort of understanding the axolotls.
I was an axolotl and now I knew instantly that no
understanding was possible. He was outside the
aquarium, his thinking was a thinking outside the
tank. Recognizing him, being him himself, I was an
axolotl and in my world. The horror began — I
learned in the same moment — of believing myself
prisoner in the body of an axolotl, metamorphosed
into him with my human mind intact, buried alive in
an axolotl, condemned to move lucidly among
unconscious creatures. But that stopped when a foot
just grazed my face, when I moved just a little to
one side and saw an axolotl next to me who was
looking at me, and understood that he knew also,
no communication possible, but very clearly.
Or I was also in him, or all of us were thinking
humanlike, incapable of expression, limited to the
golden splendor of our eyes looking at the face of
the man pressed against the aquarium.

He returned many times, but he comes less often now.
Weeks pass without his showing up. I saw him
yesterday, he looked at me for a long time and left
briskly. It seemed to me that he was not so much
interested in us any more, that he was coming out
of habit. Since the only thing I do is think,
I could think about him a lot. It occurs to me that
at the beginning we continued to communicate, that
he felt more than ever one with the mystery which
was claiming him. But the bridges were broken
between him and me, because what was his obsession
is now an axolotl, alien to his human life. I think
that at the beginning I was capable of returning to
him in a certain way — ah, only in a certain way —
and of keeping awake his desire to know us better.
I am an axolotl for good now, and if I think like
a man it's only because every axolotl thinks like
a man inside his rosy stone semblance. I believe
that all this succeeded in communicating something
to him in those first days, when I was still he.
And in this final solitude to which he no longer
comes, I console myself by thinking that perhaps
he is going to write a story about us, that,
believing he's making up a story, he's going to
write all this about axolotls.

---

BY CLICKING AGREE YOU CONFIRM YOU HAVE READ AND
UNDERSTOOD ALL OF THE ABOVE AND WAIVE ANY RIGHT
TO QUESTION WHY THIS WAS THE TERMS OF SERVICE.
